docs: add Tenant GitOps page (#631)
bytebase/bytebase.com: content/docs/tenant-database-management/tenant-gitops.md

---
title: Tenant GitOps
---

To practice GitOps with a [tenant project](/docs/tenant-database-management/tenant-project), you need to enable the [VCS Integration](/docs/vcs-integration/overview) for your selected project, then use the VCS repository instead of our UI to organize and propose schema and data changes.

## Migration scripts

Migration scripts are stored in the VCS repository for a GitOps-enabled tenant project, and use the file path to provide important migration information, including environment, database, version, type, and description. These information are captured through the [**File path template**](/docs/vcs-integration/name-and-organize-schema-files#file-path-template).

### Use SQL files

Typically, SQL files are used as migration scripts for both schema (DDL) and data (DML) changes.

> For example, to add a new table in the "Staging" envrionment for the database "store" using the default **File path template** (`{{ENV_NAME}}/{{DB_NAME}}##{{VERSION}}##{{TYPE}}##{{DESCRIPTION}}.sql`), the file path of the SQL file would look like `bytebase/Staging/store##0001##ddl##add-company-table.sql` with the following content:

Reviewer: "Staging" -> Staging
"store" -> store

> For example, to add a new table in the "Staging" envrionment for the database "store" using the default **File path template** (`{{ENV_NAME}}/{{DB_NAME}}##{{VERSION}}##{{TYPE}}##{{DESCRIPTION}}.sql`), the file path of the SQL file would look like `bytebase/Staging/store##0001##ddl##add-company-table.sql` with the following content:

Author: ```suggestion
For example, to add a new table in the `Staging` envrionment for the database `store` using the default **File path template** (`{{ENV_NAME}}/{{DB_NAME}}##{{VERSION}}##{{TYPE}}##{{DESCRIPTION}}.sql`), the file path of the SQL file would look like `bytebase/Staging/store##0001##ddl##add-company-table.sql` with the following content:
```

```sql
CREATE TABLE company (
  id INT PRIMARY KEY     NOT NULL,
  name           TEXT    NOT NULL,
  address        CHAR(50)
);
```

Where `bytebase/` is the **Base directory**, depending on [your configuration](/docs/vcs-integration/enable-version-control-workflow#step-3---configure-deploy).

### Use YAML manifest

<hint-block type="warning">

1. This feature is currently experimental, behaviors are subject to change, please only use with guidance from our technical support.

> 1. The **File path template** must use `.sql` as the file extension for migration scripts.

Reviewer 2: yml?

And do we support .yaml?

Author: We don't support `.yaml`, and this sentence is correct with `.sql`, because we replace `.sql` with `.yml` for the file path template at matching time behind the sense if the committed file is ending with `.yml`.

1. Only data change (DML) is supported.

</hint-block>

> Using SQL files as migration scripts has the limitation of only being able to target a single database, to make a data change across an arbitrary set of databases, you can use a YAML manifest without any configuration change on the UI.

Reviewer 2: Remove the "without any configuration change on the UI." part?

Author: Why? 🤔

Reviewer 2: what's the important info that "without any configuration change on the UI" tries to convey otherwise reader could miss?

Author: I think "nothing additional is required to be able to use the YAML manifest".

A YAML manifest follows the same file path convention as defined by the **File path template** but using `.yml` instead of `.sql` as the file extension:

```diff
-bytebase/Staging/store##0003##dml##insert-companies.sql

> +bytebase/Staging/store##0003##dml##insert-companies.yml

Reviewer 2: any specific reason to use "Staging" instead of "staging"?

normally we use lower case

Author: The environment name is case-sensitive in the file path and we generate default environments like `Dev`, `Staging`, `Prod` in our product. 

<img width="727" alt="CleanShot 2022-11-17 at 20 41 20@2x" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2946214/202449249-d620350a-034e-415d-bc32-7e45afcf131f.png">

```

> Below is the file content for adding a new table for the database "supermarket":

Reviewer: "supermarket" -> `supermarket`

> Below is the file content for adding a new table for the database "supermarket":

Author: ```suggestion
Below is the file content for adding a new table for the database `supermarket`:
```

```yml
databases:
  - name: supermarket
statement: |
  INSERT INTO company (id, name, address) VALUES (1, 'Bytebase', '1 DevOps street');
```

> Please be noted that the database name in the file path ("store") is now completely ignored.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Please be noted if you specify the database name ("store") in the file path, it will be ignored.
```

Author: I don't think this is a "if" situation, because once the `{{DB_NAME}}` placeholder is used in the file path template, it is required (and the "if" would give the ambiguity/false-assumption to the user that they can actually omit the database name).

> Please be noted that the database name in the file path ("store") is now completely ignored.

Reviewer: "store" -> `store`

> Please be noted that the database name in the file path ("store") is now completely ignored.

Author: ```suggestion
Please be noted that the database name in the file path (`store`) is now completely ignored.
```

> Both SQL files and YAML manifests can co-exist and be used on per-migration basis depending on your needs. Your VCS repository for storing migartion scripts could look like follows after several migrations:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Both SQL files and YAML manifests can co-exist and be used on per-migration basis depending on your needs. After several migrations, your VCS repository for storing migration scripts could look like follows:
```
